All right, so now that we've set up our environment for this new calculator project, we can get started
actually writing our first unit test.
So first thing we'll need to do is to create a new class for testing.
Automated unit tests are just code somewhat like any other code that we would write, except their purpose
is simply to automate tests.
So we will create a new class similarly, as we have done in the past.
However, now we will create test classes in the test folder here.
So right click on the test folder, go to new and select Java class, just as we've done many times
before.
However, this time we're going to do two things at the same time.
Not only are we going to create a class, but we're also going to create a proper package for this class
to live in, and we're going to do that all in one in one step.
So first, we're going to type in the name of the package.
Now, a common convention in professional Java programming is to name our packages based, at least
in part on the name of the company or organization that we're working for.
So in my case, I'm going to use my own company, Neutrino, as the starting point for this package
name.
We typically will use the domain name of the company backward.
So in my case, it would be com all lowercase com that neutrino cis like that.
Now, in addition to the domain name of the organization you're working for, you'll also typically
have a name for the product that you're making.
In this case, I will just refer to it as calculator.
So I'm going to put a period and then call you later, like so.
And then finally, one more period and then the name of the actual class that we're creating, this
is going to be a class for testing our calculator app.
So I'm just going to name this with a Capital C now because this is going to be the name of the actual
class and not just the package capital C for calculator.
And then because it's a test, the class will actually be called calculator test.
Like so now you're welcome to use this same package name, or you could name this package name anything
you like.
The package name doesn't really matter.
It's just a way to organize our code.
So if you don't have a company or you don't want to reflect the company, you can use your first name.
It really doesn't matter what you put here.
OK?
You could put Bob Dot calculator test.
All right.
And then once you're done doing all of that, you can hit return.
And so now what has happened is the idea has created a new class called calculator test, and it created
the package inferred from the fully qualified class name that we just gave it.
Compact neutrino start calculator.
And you can see that reflected over here in the project pane as well.
All right.
So now we can get started writing our first test.
So writing unit tests is really just a matter of writing methods.
Individual tests and individual test scenarios are coded inside of actual methods.
OK, so the idea is to think of a scenario, a small, simple scenario to test and then write a method
to actually test that scenario.
So let's do our first one here.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to create a new line here and I'm going to give myself one line
of extra space and I'm going to create a method now.
J Unit test methods have to follow a general signature style, and that is that they have to be public
and they have to be void.
And then you can name the test methods, whatever you like now about maybe around 10 years ago or so.
Older versions of J Unit actually required that all test methods start with the word test all lowercase.
But that requirement has been dropped for a long time now because there's now an alternative and more
flexible way to let the framework know which methods are meant to be unit tests.
And so we can name these things anything.
So now at this point, we need to kind of think for a moment.
What is it that we actually want to test?
So we're going to make a program that simulates a calculator, and so we need to ask ourselves, Well,
what are some of the simplest things that a calculator can do?
Obviously, a calculator can typically do basic math operations, such as addition subtraction multiple.
Location and division among those for operations, I would venture to say that addition is the simplest.
Now the next thing we need to consider is what is a very simple scenario that we could test within the
realm of addition.
And to my mind, the easiest thing we could probably test would be to first just test what happens when
you add zero plus zero.
So when you're writing unit tests, you want to usually start off with these very simple, most obvious
scenarios.
First and do a few of those and then maybe find some more difficult ones and eventually even find what
are called edge cases, which we will speak about shortly.
All right.
So let's assume that our first unit test is going to be one in which we test the scenario of adding
zero plus zero.
So in that case, I would create a test method and name it something along those lines to indicate what
the scenario is.
So maybe I might say something like can add zero plus zero, OK, something along those lines pretty
descriptive without being overly long.
All right.
So there's my my my test method.
Now, how am I actually going to test anything?
The only class we've actually created so far is the test class itself.
What are we going to test, though?
So this takes us to the next concept that I want to share.
And we're not just going to learn how to use unit to write automated unit tests.
We're actually going to learn a technique called test driven development or TDD in test driven development.
We don't just write tests.
We actually let the tests drive what actual code we write for the actual program.
So what I mean by that is we actually write some of the test code first.
And having done that, we then determine what actual program code needs to exist.
OK, so we're making a distinction between test code and program code.
And that's also the reason why we have a test folder and then a main folder.
So our program code, the actual real code that does the real work in this case, simulating a calculator,
that code would go in this main folder, but the code that we use to test that code goes in the test
folder, OK?
So what we're basically going to do is we're going to envision how we would like to be able to interact
with our main calculator code.
And then after we have written a little bit of test code based on that vision, we will then create
the real code or we'll do it as we go.
So if that's not clear, don't worry, we're going to see it right now.
So this also will give us an opportunity, by the way, to actually practice modeling concepts in an
object oriented way.
So in this case, we're going to model a calculator.
Right?
So if we're going to model a calculator, what do you think would be a good class to create?
And what might you want to call that class?
I'm thinking we probably want a class that's called calculator, right?
So I'm going to pretend like we have a class called calculator and that that class calculator has methods
on it for doing major math operations such as add, subtract, etc. And so I'm going to refer to a class
called calculator, even though it doesn't exist yet.
And you can do this and you'll just have errors until you actually go and create it.
So I'm going to write code as if I were creating an instance of this calculator.
So I'm going to create an instance of it, and I'm going to refer to it as just calc because I don't
feel like typing out the whole entire word.
And then I'm going to instantiate it.
New calculator like so.
So I'm going to imagine that that's a class that I have.
Now I've done this and we can see that the calculator class that I'm referring to is in red.
And the reason for that is because it does not yet exist now to make it exist.
All I need to do is put my cursor somewhere on this word, either either one, it doesn't matter which
one.
So I'll put my calculator somewhere near that word.
And now I get this little red light bulb here.
And if I click on it, I have options to create the calculator class and then create a few other things
as well.
Now, alternatively, having my cursor on the word calculator somewhere, I can also just hit on the
keyboard option return or alt return or alt enter on Windows and Linux.
And I get that same context menu here as well.
And here I'm going to select create class calculator.
All right.
Now the ad asks me, where do I want to create this new class?
It assumes that I want to create it in the same package as the test, and that's a good assumption that
is a standard thing to do.
So the package of your test for a particular class will typically be in the same package as the thing
you're actually testing.
So I'm going to leave that as it is.
I like that option.
However, where it's his target destination directory currently, it says source tests.
Com Neutrino source calculator.
I don't want the actual calculator class to be in the test folder.
I want it to be in the main folder.
So I'm going to actually change that by clicking on these three dots here.
And now I can simply select Source Main.
Com Neutrinos this calculator, so I'm going to choose that top option there instead.
And then click, OK, all right, and now click OK again.
And so now the ABC has created a new class calculator in the same package.
But under the main folder, and I can prove that by just expanding this main folder.
By the way, if you're ever looking at a class in the I.D. and you want to jump directly to that file
in the project pane, one way you can do that without having to expand out and look for it over here
is to simply click on this little target icon here.
Select Opened File.
So while you're in that particular file on the right hand side, if you click this that causes the project
pain to zero in or zoom in or target that file in the Project Tree here.
So nice little tidbit there.
And as we can see, the calculator class is indeed underneath the same package com neutrino system calculator.
All right.
So we've got our test and then we've got the what's called system under test, which just means this
is the thing that this test is testing, OK, the system under test or sue Ti.
All right.
So now we can jump back over to our test class.
And I also want to show you there are a couple of ways to do that.
Obviously, you could just click on the calculator test to bring you back over here, which by the way,
now you'll notice that the calculator class is no longer read because now it exists.
But another way that you can jump over to the test class from the system under test is to select command
shift T or control shift for Windows and Linux.
What that does is it causes the ADP to navigate to the test class from the system under test or the
class that you're testing.
All right.
So now we've got our calculator instance created.
Now we need to imagine how we would want to use it to calculate the addition of zero and zero.
So on a new line, I'm going to write code as if there was a method on this class that could let me
add zero plus zero.
So I would imagine that I would want to do something like Calc Dot, add maybe and then parentheses,
and then I'm just going to pass it a zero comma, zero like.
So and then I'm also going to imagine that if I had this method called add that it would return an integer
with the sum of these two numbers.
So I'm going to put my cursor at the front of this method and I'm going to create an ENT variable and
I'm going to name it some.
Now you can call it whatever you like, but some makes the most sense in English, right?
And I'm going to pretend like I could capture that sum.
Now, as you'll notice, the word add is in red, because again, the ADP knows that there isn't an
actual method called add on the calculator class yet.
Right?
And so now, just as we had done before, we can either click on this little red light bulb here, or
we can put our cursor on the word add and then use option return or alt enter.
And we can choose create method, add in calculator and the ADP will offer to get this method started
for us someone to select that now, and it jumps us back into the calculator class.
Now, don't hit enter yet.
I've seen a lot of developers for some reason they just immediately hit enter when they let the ADP
generate code like this.
Don't do that because the idea actually waiting to ask us a few questions to confirm.
Is this actually what we want?
So the first question it's asking is, OK, I can infer from the way that you wrote that add method
in the test that you want.
This add method to return an integer.
Is that correct?
So that's why this is kind of highlighted in blue and everything.
If we do want it to return and we can hit tab, otherwise we could choose a different data type here.
So I'm going to hit tab to tab over to the next question, so to speak, because I'm OK with that.
Now it's asking me, is the first parameter that you want to be able to pass into this method of type
entry?
And yes, it is.
So I'm going to tab again now.
It's asking me, what do I want?
Call that first parameter.
I do not like the name or label I, so I'm going to name it number one, and then I'm on to tap again.
And yes, I do.
I do want the second parameter to be an ENT as well.
And then I'm going to tap once more and it's asking for the name of the second parameter, and I'm going
to name this number two.
Now these names don't matter just you, but you probably want to give it a somewhat meaningful name.
All right.
Now I'm done, and now I can hit return.
And so the last thing the ADC does now is it generates just enough boilerplate code so that this method
won't be in error.
OK, so it just generated some default basic code for us.
Now, one of the principles in test driven development is we don't write any more code than our test
demands of us.
So even though I can clearly see that what we have in this code right now isn't going to satisfy every
test scenario that we could throw at this method.
I'm going to leave it alone for now until we write a test that forces me to write more code here.
OK, so for right now, I'm going to leave this and then I'm going to jump back over to the test class.
And now suddenly, the add method is no longer read because now we've created that method.
And now finally, we'll need one more line of code, and this is one of the most important lines of
code.
So when we write a test, the basic idea of of testing is that we set up some scenario.
OK, so in this case, we're setting up a scenario of having a calculator and entering two zeros and
asking it to add those two numbers together.
But the final thing we must do is we need to make an assertion.
We need to assert that if I had a calculator and I told that calculator object to add zero and zero,
I assert that the sum of those two numbers would be, in this case, zero.
That's my assertion.
This is how we actually test something.
So now we need to tell the unit test that we're writing to assert that zero plus zero equals zero.
And the way we do that is by using a static method that comes with the J Unit framework.
So so far, we haven't actually done anything that's specific to a unit, but we're about two now.
So if we reference a method called assert equals and then use parentheses because it is a method and
then we move our cursor onto this word, assert equals.
Now again, we can do an option return and we have a few options.
Now we get the option to create a method called assert equals.
But this time, we don't want to create that method because the method already exists.
We just need to import it.
So we have a second option here import static method.
And if you click on that.
Now, the I.D. says I have found a static method called Assert Equals, which lives on a class called
assertions.
And by the way, this assertions class comes to us via the J Unit library that we imported at the beginning
of this module.
OK, so that's where that's coming from.
And so we're going to tell the I.D. to go ahead and import this method for us.
Now, we haven't explicitly seen importing methods before.
We've imported classes, but this is the first time we're importing a method and specifically we're
importing a static method, which is the only type of method that you can actually import.
So let's go ahead and select that.
And now notice what happens on Line three.
We have this new line here import static, then a big, long, fully qualified class name, followed
by the name of a specific method on this class.
So what we're doing here is we're simply telling the ADP I want to be able to refer to a static method
on this class without having to refer to the method using the entire class name.
So in other words, we could have typed assertions dot assert equals blah blah blah.
We could have done this, in which case I would have had to import the assertions class.
And then every time I wanted to use this assert equals method static method.
I would have had to type out assertions that assert equals.
That's the typical way that you would often refer to any static method.
However, Java does allow us to import a static method so that we can drop the class name part of it.
So it's really just another convenient shorthand.
All right.
So now if I put my cursor here inside of the parentheses and I do a command piece so that I can see
what are the parameters that I can enter into this method, I see that there are a few different sets
of parameters that I can choose from.
And the first choice here is I can pass in a number in this case, a short.
And let's see if we scroll through here.
We can see that there are many versions of this method that take various data types, such as short,
byte, long and cetera.
But the basic thing is you can pass in two numbers.
The first number is a number that you're expecting to see.
And then the second parameter is the actual number that you received.
OK.
So knowing that if I click here to dismiss that little pop up, what I'm expecting here in this case
is that zero plus zero equals zero.
And then if I put a comma here now what?
What actually is being received is whatever value is in this sum here.
So for the second parameter, I'm going to simply type some.
Like so and then I can close that out with a semicolon.
OK, so we're saying that we expect zero will be the sum of this calculation.
That's what we're saying or looked added.
Or if you want to look at it in another way, we're saying that I expect that the sum equals zero.
OK, so how, however you want to look at it now, there is one more optional parameter that we can
pass into this method.
If you put your cursor on here and do a command p again, you will see that you can also supply.
I know this might not be very easy to look at, so currently we're using this version of the method
one that accepts accepts two integers.
OK.
But there's another version of this that accepts two integers, plus a third parameter, which is a
message.
Now this is to be used if you want to be able to provide a custom message in the event that this assertion
turns out to be false or not true.
So, for example, if I put a comma here, then I can say something like I was expecting sum of zero
or I could type it, or I could use the number, something like that.
OK.
This comes in handy, particularly in cases where you might have multiple assertions in one test method
and you want to pinpoint which of the multiple assertions in this one method was the failure.
You would then see this method.
So maybe we'll look at what that looks like shortly.
OK.
But this is optional.
You don't have to have this, especially in a case where you only have one assertion in the test method
itself.
All right.
Now, one last thing that we require in order to be able to actually run this test, we need to flag
this method as being a unit test.
If you recall, at the beginning of this, I stated that quite a number of years ago, earlier versions
of J Unit actually required that your test methods started with the word test like this?
OK.
That is no longer a requirement, though.
And the reason it isn't is because we can now indicate which methods should be tested by using a little
snippet of code, which is called an annotation.
Let me show you what that looks like.
So if you put your cursor right above this test method and then type at and then capital test for test
like, so you should have this dropdown here.
And then if the word test by itself, as I have here, is the first selected option, you can hit return
or or click that.
And now what that just did is that just imported this annotation right here on Line three, import blah
blah blah dot test.
So an annotation is a little snippet of code basically, which serves as almost like metadata or a hint
for, in this case, a method.
Now there are annotations that can be used in a number of ways.
They can be used to annotate a method or a field or even a parameter.
So the way that the sanitation will be used is that when we start to run this test or this test class
J Unit, the Framework Jane Unit will start up and it will actually scan this code looking for all methods
that are annotated as a test, such as on Line nine.
And then that's how J Unit will know which methods it should call in order to run our tests.
So if we don't have the test annotation on this method, then the method won't be run as a test.
And incidentally, these annotations don't necessarily have to be above the method.
We could put it to the side, although I don't personally usually like that format.
But as long as it's on or above the test method, that's what counts.
All right.
So I'm going to put that back the way that I prefer it to be.
And I would say this is probably the more common way you'll usually see annotations for methods.
All right.
And as soon as we put that annotation there, these little icons, these little play buttons showed
up because that that let the aid know that, OK, you're writing a test, right?
All right.
So now.
We can run this.
Now we have the option, just as with regular code to run an individual method or run all of the tests
on a class, in this case we only have one, so it doesn't really matter.
I'm going to go ahead and just click on this one here.
OK.
And so what happened was this little pane opened up at the bottom, and it gives us a little report.
And the report says, Hey, here are the results of running the tests.
They took 161 milliseconds to run.
I ran tests on a class called calculator test and I ran one test method can add zero plus zero and it's
green with this green checkmark, which means that that test passed.
And so congratulations, you have now successfully written and run your first unit test.
All right.
So in the next lesson, we will write a few more tests and we'll talk a little bit more about TDD test
driven development and how we can test more scenarios.
So I will see you there.